# SHA-256 Implementation

A C++ implementation of the SHA-256 hashing algorithm.

## Features
- Compliant with [FIPS 180-4](https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/fips/nist.fips.180-4.pdf).
  - Key Points of FIPS 180-4 (Federal Information Processing Standard 180-4)
    - For SHA-256, when a message is is any length less than 2^64 bits is input,the resulting output is a message digest.
    - The message digest is always exactly 256 bits in length.
    - The hash functions defined herein, including SHA-256, are called secure because it is computationally infeasible to
      1. find a message that corresponds with a given digest
      2. find two different messages that produce the same message digest.
    - The algorithm is one-way.
    - Such an algorithm is useful in the verification of digital signatures and verifying message integrity.
    - Can be described in two stages:
      1. preprocessing
      2. hash computation
        - generates a message schedule from the padded message which and uses that schedule, along with functions, constants, and word operations to iteratively generate a series of hash values. The final hash value generated by the hash computation is used to determine the message digest.
    - SHA-256 message size (bits): < 2^64; Block Size (bits): 512; Word Size (bits): 32; Message Digest Size (bits): 256
    - *Big Endian* is used throughout this specification to represent byte order within each 32-bit word.
    - Utilizes the fractional parts of the first 64 prime number cubed roots (see Sha256.h search 'k' for details).
    - Hash initial calues are the first 32 bits of the decimal portions of the square roots of the first 8 prime numbers (see Sha256.h search for h0 through h7 for details).

## Algorithm
- Initialize 8 32-bit words which represent the decimals of the square roots of the first 8 prime numbers.
- Initilize the 'round constants', 64 32-bit words which represent the decimals of the cubed roots of the first 64 prime numbers.
- Pre-Processing
  - With message of original length L bits,
    - append a single '1' bit
    - append K '0' bits, where 0 =< K L+1+K+64 is a multiple of 512
    - append length L as a 64-bit *Big Endian* integer, making the total post-processed length a multiple of 512 bits.
  - Such that bits in the medssage are: \<original  message of length L\>1\<K 0s\>\<L as a 64-bit integer\>, the number of bits will be a multiple of 512.
- Process the message in 512-bit chunks:
  - Create a message schedule of 64 32-bit words.
  - Copy chunk into first 16 words (indexed 0 to 15) of the message schedule array.
  - Extend the first 16 words of the message schedule array into the remaining 48 words (indexed 16 to 63):
    - From word 16 to 63, do the sequence:
      - s0 = (word\[word_index-15\] RIGHT_ROTATE 7) XOR (word\[word_index-15\] RIGHT_ROTATE 18) XOR (word\[word_index-15\] RIGHT_SHIFT 3)
      - s1 = (word\[word_index-2\] RIGHT_ROTATE 17) XOR (word\[word_index-2\]) RIGHT_ROTATE 19) XOR (word\[word_index-2\] RIGHT_SHIFT 10)
      - word\[word_index\] = word\[word_index-16\] + s0 + word\[word_index-7\] + s1
  - Initialize working variables a to h to current hash values h0 to h7
  - Compression function main loop:
    - From index 0 to 63 do the sequence:
      - S1 = (e RIGHT_ROTATE 6) XOR (e RIGHT_ROTATE 11) XOR (e RIGHT_ROTATE 25)
      - ch = (e AND f) XOR ((NOT(e)) AND g)
      - temp1 = h + S1 + ch + (cubed-prime# 'k' at current index) + (word at current index)
      - S0 = (a RIGHT_ROTATE 2) XOR (a RIGHT_ROTATE 13) XOR (a RIGHT_ROTATE 22)
      - maj = (a AND b) XOR (a AND c) XOR (b AND c)
      - temp2 = S0 + maj
      - h = g
      - g = f
      - f = e
      - e = d + temp1
      - d = c
      - c = b
      - b = a
      - a = temp1 + temp2
   - Add the compressed chunk to the current hash value:
     - h0 = h0 + a
     - h1 = h1 + b
     - h2 = h2 + c
     - h3 = h3 + d
     - h4 = h4 + e
     - h5 = h5 + f
     - h6 + h6 + g
     - h7 = h7 + h
- Produce the final hash value (*Big Endian*): digest/hash = h0 append h1 append h2 append h3 append h4 append h5 append h6 append h7

## Development Methodology
- The [SHA-256 pseudo code from Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SHA-2#Pseudocode) was used as the original basis for this C++ implementation.
- AI tool [Google Gemini](https://gemini.google.com/app) was used to:
  - understand/clarify sections of the Wikipedia pseudocode
  - gather implementation suggestions for using the most suitable C++ idioms
  - debugging issues and spotting errors in this custom SHA-256 C++ implementation
  - ensuring FIPS 180-4 compliance
  - conjuring up different test cases to catch common 'hiccups' in the implementation
  - maintaining *Big Endian* byte order
  - answer SHA-256 algorithm design specification questions:
     - Q: Why are square root and cubed root decimal values of prime numbers used in SHA-256 rather than other values? What makes them special?
        - A: They are used to achieve transparency and trust; they are known as "nothing up my sleeve" numbers. In other words, they are to remove any suspicion of the developer introducing secret backdoors or methematical weaknesses only the designer knows about. Cryptographic algorithms need constants that appear "random" and uncorrelated. They should be nonrepeating and should have a balanced distribution of 1s and 0s to ensure the internal state of the hash function mixes data thoroughly. Because square and cubed roots of prime numbers are irrational, their decimal expansions are non-repeating and behave like a sequence of random numbers. In summary, they ensure that the algorithm was designed with integrity.
     - Q: Why are these arithmetic and logical operations used: XOR, RIGHT_ROTATE, RIGHT_SHIFT, AND, +?
       - A: They are chosen to achieve two primary goals: *diffusion* and *confusion*.
         - XOR is used for diffusion. It is a linear operation that is excellent for spreading the influence of a single input across many output bits.
         - RIGHT_ROTATE and RIGHT_SHIFT are the scramblers. This ensures that the impact of a specific bit in the message is not localized but is physically moved to different positions as the rounds progress.
         - AND is a non-linear operation to add confusion by biasing the output towards 0. This creates irreversibility because you cannot tell which bit introduced the 0 in the prior step.
         - ADDITION (+) is an operation which introducing carrying, whereby the operation can not only affect the bit valu eat position *n*, but also *n+1*, *n+2*, etc.
         Altogether they create the "avalanche effect".
     - Q: What is the "avalanche effect"?
       - A: This refers to the fact that the smallest change in the input message results in an entirely different output from the output of the original, unaltered message.
## Getting Started
### Prerequisites
- A C++11 (or higher) compliant compiler (e.g., g++, clang).

### Compilation
```bash
g++ main.cpp Sha256.cpp -o sha256